<#define shexec|$ #1
<#exec #1 2~>&1>>

# CME 212: 2016-01-29

* Compilation process
* Linking

## Compilation

* Although you can go from source code to an executable in one command, the
process is actually made up of 4 steps

  * Preprocessing
  
  * Compilation
  
  * Assembly
  
  * Linking

* `g++` and `clang++` (and `gcc` or `clang` for C code) are driver programs that
invoke the appropriate tools to perform these steps

* This is a high level overview.  The compilation process also includes
  optimization phases during compilation and linking.

### Behind the scenes

We can inspect the compilation process in more detail with the `-v` compiler
argument.  `-v` typically stands for "verbose".

```
<#shexec g++ -v -Wall -Wextra -Wconversion src/hello1.cpp -o src/hello1>
```

### Splitting up the steps manually

GNU compiler flags:

* `-E`: preprocess
* `-S`: compile
* `-c`: assemble

File `src/hello1.cpp`:
```c++
<#include "src/hello1.cpp">
```

```
# preprocess
<#shexec g++ -E -o src/hello1.i src/hello1.cpp>
# compile
<#shexec g++ -S -o src/hello1.s src/hello1.i>
# assemble
<#shexec g++ -c -o src/hello1.o src/hello1.s>
# link
<#shexec g++ -o src/hello1 src/hello1.o>
# run
<#shexec ./src/hello1>
```

### Side notes

* Languages like Python, Ruby, and Javascript are interpreted.  Another program,
  called the interpreter executes code from those languages.

* Some languages like Julia and Javascript (in modern browsers) are JIT
  compiled.  JIT stands for just-in-time.  Compilation happens at runtime,
  possibly when the script is loaded or at the time when a function is called.
  
* The set of `clang` compilers come from the LLVM project.  LLVM stands for
  Low-Level Virtual Machine.  They define an **intermediate representation**
  (IR) and perform code optimization over IR.  Language designers can then
  translate their language to LLVM IR and take advantage of the large set of
  code optimization techniques in LLVM.  (Julia is a language that JIT compiles
  to LLVM IR.  LLVM IR is then converted to machine code.)

* Java is a bit different.  Java compiles to "byte code", which is executed in a
  Java Virtual Machine.  In some cases Java byte code is JIT or AOT
  (ahead-of-time) compiled to machine code.  For example, most Android programs
  are written Java.  Before Android 5.0, programs were JIT compiled by a system
  called Dalvik.  In Android 5.0 and beyond, programs are AoT compiled upon
  installation.  This is why in certain circumstances installing apps takes
  longer than it used to.  But in the end, things are run faster.

### Preprocessing

* The preprocessor handles the lines that start with `#`

  * `#include`
  * `#define`
  * `#if`
  * etc.

* You can invoke the preprocessor with the `cpp` command

### Preprocessed file

From `src/hello1.i`:

```
# 1 "hello1.cpp"
# 1 "<command-line>"
# 1 "/usr/include/stdc-predef.h" 1 3 4
# 30 "/usr/include/stdc-predef.h" 3 4
# 1 "/usr/include/x86_64-linux-gnu/bits/predefs.h" 1 3 4
# 31 "/usr/include/stdc-predef.h" 2 3 4
# 1 "<command-line>" 2
# 1 "hello1.cpp"
# 1 "/usr/include/c++/4.8/iostream" 1 3
# 36 "/usr/include/c++/4.8/iostream" 3

...

int main()
{
  std::cout << "Hello" << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

Approximately 17,500 lines omitted!

### Compilation

* Compilation is the process of translating source code to assembly commands

* The assembly commands are still human readable text (if the human knows
assembly)

From `src/hello.s`:

```
main:
.LFB1020:
	.cfi_startproc
	pushq	%rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
	.cfi_offset 6, -16
	movq	%rsp, %rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa_register 6
	movl	$.LC0, %esi
	movl	$_ZSt4cout, %edi
	call	_ZStlsISt11char_traitsIcEERSt13basic_ostreamIcT_ES5_PKc
	movl	$_ZSt4endlIcSt11char_traitsIcEERSt13basic_ostreamIT_T0_ES6_, %esi
	movq	%rax, %rdi
	call	_ZNSolsEPFRSoS_E
	movl	$0, %eax
	popq	%rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa 7, 8
	ret
	.cfi_endproc
```

### Side node: symbols and mangling

What the heck is:
```
	call	_ZStlsISt11char_traitsIcEERSt13basic_ostreamIcT_ES5_PKc
```

Let's look at the Hello World program in basic C: `src/helloc.c`:

```c
<#include "src/helloc.c">
```

Assemble the program with:

```
<#shexec gcc -S -o src/helloc.s src/helloc.c>
```

And inspect the assembly:

```
main:
.LFB0:
	.cfi_startproc
	pushq	%rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
	.cfi_offset 6, -16
	movq	%rsp, %rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa_register 6
	movl	$.LC0, %edi
	call	puts
	movl	$0, %eax
	popq	%rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa 7, 8
	ret
	.cfi_endproc
```

The function call to put something on to the standard output stream is `puts`.
You can see that right in the assembly!  This is because C function names
directly translate to assembly symbols.  A *symbol* is a text label for a
function or variable (sometimes called name, label...).  C++ does name or
symbol mangling to support namespaces and function overloading.  This is why the
assembly symbols for C++ functions are much more complicated.  Name/symbol
mangling is defined in an application binary interface (ABI).  Different
compilers do different things and it is a pain!

### Assembly

* This step translates the text representation of the assembly instructions into
the binary machine code in a `.o` file

* `.o` files are called object files

* Linux uses the Executable and Linkable Format (ELF) for these files

* If you try to look at these files with a normal text editor you will just see
garbage, intermixed with a few strings

* Sometimes it is helpful to inspect object files with the `nm` command to see
  what symbols are defined:

```
<#shexec nm ./src/hello1.o>
```

### Linking

* Linking is the process of building the final executable by combining (linking)
the `.o` file(s), and possibly library files as well

* The linker makes sure all of the required functions are present

* If for example `foo.o` contains a call to a function called `bar()`, there has
to be another `.o` file or library file that provides the implementation of the
`bar()` function

### Linking example

`src/foobar.hpp`:
```c++
<#include src/foobar.hpp>
```

`src/foo.cpp`:
```c++
<#include src/foo.cpp>
```

`src/bar.cpp`:
```c++
<#include src/bar.cpp>
```

`src/main.cpp`:
```c++
<#include src/main.cpp>
```

### Linking example

Compile and assemble source files, but don't link:

```
<#shexec g++ -c src/foo.cpp -o src/foo.o>
<#shexec g++ -c src/bar.cpp -o src/bar.o>
<#shexec g++ -c src/main.cpp -o src/main.o>
```

What symbols are present in the object files?

```
<#shexec nm src/foo.o>
<#shexec nm src/bar.o>
<#shexec nm src/main.o>
```

What happens if we try to link `main.o` into an executable with out pointing to
the other object files?

```
<#shexec g++ src/main.o -o src/main>
```

Ahhh, linker errors!  Let's do it right:

```
<#shexec g++ src/main.o src/foo.o src/bar.o -o src/main>
<#shexec ./src/main>
```

### Libraries

* Libraries are really just a file that contain one or more `.o` files

* On Linux these files typically have a `.a` (static library) or `.so` (dynamic
library) extension

* `.so` files are analogous to `.dll` files on Windows

* `.dylib` files on Mac OS X and iOS are also very similar to `.so` files

* Static libraries are factored into the executable at link time in the
compilation process.

* Shared (dynamic) libraries are loaded up at run time.

### JPEG Example

From `src/hw6.cpp`:

```c++
...

#include <jpeglib.h>

#include "hw6.hpp"


void ReadGrayscaleJPEG(std::string filename, boost::multi_array<unsigned char,2> &img)
{
  /* Open the file, read the header, and allocate memory */

  FILE *f = fopen(filename.c_str(), "rb");
  if (not f)
  {
    std::stringstream s;
    s << __func__ << ": Failed to open file " << filename;
    throw std::runtime_error(s.str());
  }
  ...
} 

...

#ifdef DEBUG
int main()
{
  boost::multi_array<unsigned char,2> img;
  ReadGrayscaleJPEG("stanford.jpg", img);
  WriteGrayscaleJPEG("test.jpg", img);

  return 0;
}
#endif /* DEBUG */
```

Let's try to compile:

```
<#shexec g++ -std=c++11 -Wall -Wextra -Wconversion src/hw6.cpp -o src/hw6>
```

That did not work.  The linker looks for the `main` symbol when trying to build
and executable.  This linker also cannot find all of the symbols from the JPEG
library.

Let's find the `jpeglib.h` header file:

```
<#shexec ls -l /usr/include/jpeglib.h>
```

Let's find `libjpeg`:

```
<#shexec ls -l /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libjpeg.*>
```

Note that the library files may be in a different location on your system.

Now let's compile:

```
<#shexec g++ -std=c++11 -Wall -Wextra -Wconversion src/hw6.cpp -o src/hw6 -DDEBUG -I/usr/include -L/usr/lib64 -ljpeg>
<#shexec ./src/hw6>
```

* `-I/usr/include`: look in this directory for include files (optional in this case)
* `-L/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu`: look in this directory for library files (optional in this case)
* `-ljpeg`: link to the `libjpeg.{a,so}` file (not optional here)

We can use the program `ldd` to see which dynamic libraries are going to be
required at runtime:

```
<#shexec ldd src/hw6>
```

Let's say that we want to distribute a binary for our program that does not
require `libjpeg.so` to be installed on a system.  We can **statically** link
`libjpeg.a`.

```
<#shexec g++ -std=c++11 -Wall -Wextra -Wconversion src/hw6.cpp -o src/hw6 -DDEBUG -I/usr/include /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libjpeg.a>
```

and inspect the output:

```
<#shexec ldd src/hw6>
```

Note: `ldd` may actually execute code in the binary that it is looking at.
Thus, only run `ldd` on programs you trust.  If you would not run the program
for some reason, don't run it with `ldd`.

### Note on argument order in link step

```
# compile
<#shexec g++ -std=c++11 -Wall -Wextra -Wconversion -c src/hw6.cpp -o src/hw6.o -DDEBUG -I/usr/include>
# link
<#shexec g++ -std=c++11 /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libjpeg.a src/hw6.o -o src/hw6>
```

Gah!  But this will work:

```
# link
<#shexec g++ -std=c++11 src/hw6.o /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libjpeg.a -o src/hw6>
```

The linker employs an algorithm for symbol resolution that depends on command
line argument order.  General rule: put archives (`.a` files) and shared
libraries after your object (`.o` files).
