# Friday, February 19

## Outside libraries

* **Open** for extension, **closed** for modification
* Super powerful to use our unified interface for Graph to implement methods in MTL
* We get all of the power of MTL for free without rewriting anything

## Inheritance and polymorphism

### Object-oriented programming
* Object-oriented programming is
    * Inheritance
    * Dynamic polymorhpism
    * Static polymorphism
* We want to express intuitive relationships between classes
* We want to reuse code
* We want to separate interfaces and implementations
* Recall the ordering 
```{cpp}
class A : private totally_ordered<A> {
	// ...
}
```
* This is not polymorhpism, is a syntatic sweetening via inheritance (code reuse)
* Iterators
    * Similar to using ```random_access_iterator```. We get all of the methods for free via using the tags.
    * These allowed a unified interface which allowed dispatching funtions behind the scenes.
    * Another example of open-closed principle
* Design by contract specifies the invariants our relationships have to hold

## Inheritance vs. composition

* These ideas are separate from aliases
```{cpp}
using Vector = Point;
```
* Or a base level reimplementation
```{cpp}
class Vector {
	double x,y,z;
	// ...
}
```
* **Composition**: the "HAS-A" relationship (implement ```A``` in terms of ```B```)
```{cpp}
class Vector {
	Point p_;
	public:
	// ...
};
```
* **Inheritance**: the "IS-A" relationship
```{cpp}
class Vector : public Point {
	// ...
};
```
* Example: unit point
```{cpp}
class UnitPoint : public Point {
	// ...
}
```
	* A UnitPoint *is a* Point (but must have unit norm)
	* Everywhere we use a UnitPoint, we could use a Point
	* But we impose new relationships on the base class 
	* UnitPoint inherits the data memebers, memeber functions, and **the invariants**
	* Consider ```double& Point::operator[](int i)```. There's an implied post condition that only the ```i```th coordinate can change. But this is not true for a UnitPoint 
	* So we cannot use UnitPoint everywhere we can use a Point
	* This is where people get into trouble
	* The base class is fragile. More on this in the reading.

## One paradigm
```{cpp}
class A {
	virtual void do() { ... }
			void to() { ... }
};

class B : public A {
	virtual void do() { ... }
	void to() { ... }
};

do_stuff(A& a) {  a.do(); }
to_stuff(A a) { a.to(); }
do_stuff(B& b) { b.do(); }
to_stuff(B b) { b.to(); }

int main() {
	B b;
	do_stuff(b);
	to_stuff(b);
	A a = b; // Copy via IS-A
	do_stuff(a); // Calls a.do()
	to_stuff(a); // Calls a.to()
	A& a = b;
	do_stuff(a); // Calls a.do() which dispatches to B's do() (since it's virtual)
	to_stuff(a); // Calls a.to() using A's to()
}
```

* If ```A::do()``` was not ```virtual```, it would have called ```A::do()``` in the second to last line

|                 | **Value** | **Reference** |
|-----------------|-----------|---------------|
| **Virtual**     | Base      | Derived |
| **Not virtual** | Base | Base|

## C++ vs. pointer semantic languages

* Python and Java are pointer-based, whereas C and C++ are value based
* There's a lot of overhead when pointing around everywhere (for instance, all of Java and ```virtual``` in C++)
* ```Iterator``` as a pure abstract base class. Forces an interface without implementing things. Inheriting classes have to implement everything.
```{cpp}
struct Iterator {
	virtual Iterator operator++() = 0;
	virtual bool operator==(Iterator it) = 0;
	virtual T& operator*() = 0;
};

class my_class : public Iterator() {
	// ...
};
```
* This is like a Java interface, since the compiler forces you to fill everything in.
* This was big 20 years ago, but isn't great now. 
* In good C++ (especially for mathematical computing), we shouldn't need ```virtual``` or interfaces very much at all.
* This upholds the separate-interface-and-implementation paradigm (so that's all well and good)
* But we don't like this **top down** view (i.e. abstract base classes and derived implementations)
* We take a **bottom up approach**: the interfaces grow out of the methods our classes have to use.
* Interfaces are defined to comply with algorithm implementations. ```std::find``` doesn't care how ```++``` is implemented, just that it does something that advances the iterator. 
* C++17 will have a new cool thing: making sure classes uphold concepts. If you pass a not-quite-iterator-concept to ```std::find```, the compiler will yell at you and tell you why it isn't an iterator.
