# Wednesday, February 3

## Thinking about deleting nodes and edges
We'll work with the following implementation

```{cpp}
struct nodeinfo {
	Point p_;
	node_value_type v;
}
std::vector<nodeinfo> nodes_;
std::vector<std::vector<uid_type>> adj_;
```
Probably don't want any other underlying data structures. Too difficult to upkeep if we have to operate on several during each method. Imagine the following use case.

```{cpp}
auto n1 = g.add_node(Point(0,0,0));
auto n2 = g.add_node(Point(1,0,0))
g.remove_node(n1);
assert(n2.position() == {1,0,0}) // True
assert(n2.index() == 0) // True (now)
```

That last case must be true because of the invariant ```g.node(i).index() == i``` for every ```0 <= i < g.num_nodes()```. **This invariant is going to make remove methods a big pain in the ass.**

Recall the representations

AF(n<sub>i</sub>) = (p<sub>i</sub>, v<sub>i</sub>, i) = ```(g_->nodes_[uid_].p_, g_->nodes_[uid_].v_, uid_)```

But this breaks now. So we want to decouple ```uid_``` from the index. Note that we can't change the ```uid_``` of the nodes, since we can't invalidate outstanding Node objects. Let's update

```{cpp}
struct nodeinfo {
	Point p_;
	node_value_type v_;
	size_type idx_;
}
```
And our abstraction becomes

AF(n<sub>i</sub>) = (p<sub>i</sub>, v<sub>i</sub>, i) = ```(g_->nodes_[uid_].p_, g_->nodes_[uid_].v_, g_->nodes_[uid_].idx_)```

Let's leave the indexing of ```edges_``` as index by uid_. We have an O(1) way to get from an uid to and index since ```nodes_``` is indexed by uid, but not the other way around. Let's make a lookup inside Graph.

```{cpp}
using uid_type = size_type;
/** or more safely
struct uid_type {
	size_type uid_;
}
uid_type convert(size_type i) {
	return uid_type(i);
}

size_type convert(uid_type i) {
	return i.uid_;
}
*/
std::vector<uid_type> idx2uid_; // Indexed by idx
```

So we'll leave deleted garbage inside ```nodes_```, but we'll make sure ```idx2uid_``` only holds the valid nodes. This is a waste of space, but there are ways around this. We could keep a list of the deleted uids, and if there's one available when we add a Node, replace that entry in ```nodes_``` with the new Node that's being added. Otherwise, we add to end. But we aren't going to do this just yet.

Ok, now inside of Graph, we now need a new way to retrieve a node by index.

```{cpp}
Node node(size_type i) {
	return Node(this, idx2uid_[i]);
}
```

Let's revise our representation of the Graph. We'll assume that removing a node doesn't change ```

* AF(Graph) = (N,E) where N=[n<sub>0</sub>,n<sub>1</sub>,...,n<sub>m-1</sub>] where m=```idx2size_.size()```
* RI(Graph) = for all ```i``` in ```idx2size_```, we have ```nodes_[i].idx_ < idx2size_.size()```

This begins to imply what ```remove_node()``` needs to do. Let's think about representations of edges.

* AF(Edge): E = { {n<sub>i</sub>, n<sub>j</sub>} | i in ```adj_[j]```}
* RI(Edge): for every i, if j is in ```adj_[i]``` then i is in ```adj_[j]``` and j is in ```idx2uid_```

This upholds the symmetry without worrying about holding on to invalidated edges in the abstraction function.

So now deletions are O(n). But we still have the wasted space. First, this also brings up the question about the node representation invariants.

* Old RI(n): ```g_ != nullptr && 0 <= uid_ < g_->nodes_size()```
* New RI(n): ```g_ != nullptr && idx2uid_[g_->nodes_[uid_].idx_] == uid_```

So now we can ask a node if it's valid. Nice! That last crazy condition is arguably not maintainable in a large scale project (thanks Blake), but we're encapsulating it inside our class' implementation that no one else has to look at.

For storing the inactive uids, we just need to check if one is available, and if so, pop it off. A vector is overkill for this. Could use a linked list easily.

RI only cares about indices of active uids. We can construct a linked list pointing to the uids of the inactive nodes.