# Monday, February 22

## Virtual functions and dynamic polymorphism

* Doesn't come up that much in computational mathematics (but it does in compilers, graphics, etc.)
* We need dynamic polymorphism when the actions or the algorithms themselves may necessary change due to unpredicatble user input (e.g. code input to compiler)
* But in computational mathematics, we write algorithms for the compiler to write and then change the data
* The structure of the data and the algorithms can be static (i.e. predictable)
### Forces from HW2
* ```ForcePair<F1,F2>``` obeyed the Force Concept (```(Node, t)``` gives a ```Point```)
* At compile time, we need to know the forces and number of forces
* A *static* number of *static* forces to create a *static* tuple-like object of forces
* Nice because there's no overhead
* But we could have another approach using inheritance
```{cpp}
// Pure base class (i.e. interface)
struct ForceBase {
	virtual Point operator()(Node n, double t) = 0;
}

struct GravityForce : public ForceBase {
	Point operator()(Node n, double) {
		return Point(0,0,-grav*n.mass);
	}
}

struct ForceCollection : public ForceBase {
	std::vector<ForceBase*> forces_;
	void add_force(ForceBase& f) { forces_.push_back(&f); }

}
```
* Note that we can't have a ```std::vector``` of references since references can't be default initialized. Pointers can be; they're initialized to null.
* This approach is slower.
* This is a top-down view. We define in code what the Force Concept is (as opposed to in comments). The Force Concept becomes the Force Interface.
* We no longer have a static number of static forces. The number and types are dynamic.
* When we compile ```ForceCollection```, we don't even need to have the possible force types defined already.
* What if we want a *static* number of *dynamic* forces?
```{cpp}
std::tuple<Force*, Force*,...> forces_;
```
* What if we want a *dynamic* number of *static* forces?
```{cpp}
std::tuple<std::vector<F1>, std::vector<F2>,...> forces_;
```
### Observer pattern

```{cpp}
class SDL_Viewer {
	void handle_event(SDL_Event e) {
		// Mouse moves, clicks, keyboard events, close window
	}
}
```
It would be cool if the event handler could implement a UDF. We write a function the does something for an event, pass it to the viewer, and then call the functor whenever an event is handled.
* Could do
```{cpp}
template <Handler>
class SDL_Viewer {
    Handler h_;
	void handle_event(SDL_Event e) {
		// Mouse moves, clicks, keyboard events, close window
	}
	void add_handler()
}
```
* Templating the whole class is our only option, but this feel wrong. A significant change (the type of the viewer) for just a couple lines of code.
* Let's use the observer pattern.
```{cpp}
class SDL_Viewer {
    std::vector<Handler*> h_;
	void handle_event(SDL_Event e) {
		// Mouse moves, clicks, keyboard events, close window
	}
	void add_handler(Handler h);
  public:
	struct Handler {
		virtual void handle(SDL_Event e)
	};
}


struct MyHandler : public SDL_Viewer::Handler {
	// ...
}

int main() {
    // ...
	if (want_handler) {
	    // Need to use new to prevent destruction outside of if scope
		MyHandler* mh = new MyHandler();
		viewer.add_handler(mh);
	}
}
```

* Raises the ownership issue. Who should create, hold, destroy objects? The code above is missing a ```delete```. Where should it go?
* Could use ```std::shared_ptr<T>``` (a smart pointer) which knows when it's safe to delete itself. Similar idea with ```std::unique_ptr<T>```
* The smart pointer approach is probably the best one. The ```std::shared_ptr<T>``` handles all of the ```new```s and ```delete```s.

## Closing

* Always a parallel between templating style and dynamic ```virtual``` function style
* Do the reading
* Liskoff substituation
* Next time: static polymorphism and the facade pattern (for fast iterators and parallel code)